Male homosexuals have equal rights. The Supreme
Court in Bowers v. Hardwick in 1986 refused to
extend the whole notion of the right of privacy to
homosexual activity, upholding a state law from
Georgia, which made it a crime. for people to
engage in sexual relations with others of the same
sex. And not all states have such laws. Texas does
not. In fact, I think the majority of states no
longer do. But they're being told they can't
enforce them. Homosexuals face discrimination
in child custody. women have lost custody of their
children because they were lesbians. Now, in at
least 90% of divorces, women retain custody of the
kids. There just are not enough male homosexuals
who actively sought custody to tell whether
they're being discriminated against. But there
was at least one case, for example, where a man
who... had been divorced, was gay, and had
visitation rights, was forbidden to take his
children to the gay church he attended, even
though that would seem to be in his First Amendment
religious rights, and was forbidden to let them
have any association with his gay male friends, as
if they were going to rape his son, which is
ridiculous. Homosexuals face discrimination in
the workplace, and certainly that has not ever
been addressed by federal laws. One of the
cruelest forms of discrimination is what arises
from the fact that there is no state anywhere in
this country in which homosexuals may marry. And
that means that unless you have ordinances or laws
as we do now in San Francisco, If you are a
homosexual living with your mother, your lover
cannot be a beneficiary of your health insurance.
Now, you can, with a life insurance policy,
usually you can name whomever you wish as a
beneficiary. But, for example, if, as often
happens, two men, say, are living together, and
one of them is employed full-time and the other one
is a student and doesn't have good health
insurance, the student cannot become, I mean, the
employed man cannot buy a family insurance and let
his lover be the beneficiary. Whereas if a couple
are married and one of them is working and the other
is a student, there's no problem at all.
You very frequently have a situation if one
partner dies, and dies without a will, who of
course the family inherits and may very well push
the lover out of the home in which they've been
living. That can be remedied by will. There is a
tragic case in Minnesota, although it's been
resolved very well, fairly well now after a very
long wait, but a couple, Karen Thompson and Sharon
Kowalski were living together. And Sharon was in a
bad automobile accident and in a coma. And her
father went to court and got named her guardian. He
forbade Thompson from seeing her, and he put his
daughter in a nursing home and essentially let her
walk for three and a half years. Not only couldn't
she see her lover, she didn't even have
rehabilitation, and all this precious time was
simply lost. And now, a year ago, Thompson won the
right to go to see her, and they were able to
communicate. She cannot speak, but she does use a
computer. Kowalski rather. Kowalski was able to
communicate that she wanted to stay with Karen and
then now the father has withdrawn his guardian and
I think either Thompson is guardian or they've
decided that Kowalski is confident to manage her
own affairs. But that kind of thing has happened a
lot. With AIDS, very frequently what has happened
is that a man will get sick and his family
essentially will take over and will treat him
very, very badly because in some anti-gay
families the attitude has been, you brought this
on yourself, and they won't let the lovers see the
man. These are things that people can take care of
by drawing up wills, by drawing up legalized
documents of what they want to happen, but of
course most people don't do that. Homosexuals
are, in many, many respects, second classes. They
simply do not have the rights that heterosexuals,
especially married heterosexuals, do as a matter
of course. I'll let you do a little speculating on
homosexual rights. What do you think
legislatively will happen, and what do you think
the courts will do about this? Oh, I think the
courts will be uniform. Well, the federal courts,
thanks to Reagan, will be hostile for a long, long
time. Within states, it varies. You know, the only
person really to look into homosexual voting
strength was Mondale. when he got the Democratic
nomination in 1984. And his people believe that
there is in this country a core of about 400 million
voters who will define themselves primarily as
homosexuals and who will vote as a bloc. Now, most
experts, and this is really since the dawn of
civilization, believe that the incidence of
homosexuality in any society is relatively
constant, that it's about 10%. People are just
born that way. And if that's true, of course, we
don't have 4 million homosexuals. We have 25
million. But he was talking about 4 million that
would vote that way. Now, on a national level, I
mean, that's really significant. If it's
scattered, since many, many homosexuals still
cannot identify themselves as such, you don't
have that much voting strength. Now obviously in
places like San Francisco you do, in New York City,
but even in New York City it took them more than 10
years to get a gay rights ordinance passed. I think
that's going to be a very slow process. I hope
eventually We're going to be at a place where
homosexuals will have fully equal rights and will
be able to marry, but that's going to be a slow one.
Let's talk about your latest paper, or one of your
latest papers, The Limits of Constitutional
Doctrine in Women's Rights. That is a paper that
has now been submitted for publication. I'm
waiting to hear about it, and I delivered it at the
Scott Press in Sweden I talked about. And
basically I was looking at a very interesting
phenomenon, which is that if you look at the cases
since 1971 when the Supreme Court began Using the
Equal Protection Clause to recognize women's
rights, you find that the majority of, not the
majority of successful plaintiffs, but the
majority of plaintiffs and the most recent
plaintiffs have been men, and that the primary
beneficiaries of these new cases have been men,
not women. And you begin asking yourself, why? And
I think I came up with something very interesting,
because the way that the court, well, we saw it in
the Baki case. The court doesn't talk about
oppression, inequality, subjection,
inferiority. The court talks about
discrimination. Its language is neutral. And
that language is a lot of help to a man who has to pay
alimony. in a state where only men have to do that.
But if you have a woman who's trying to make a claim
about divorce, for example, there's no question
it doesn't relate very well into the terms that are
set by the judges. And I look into the history of
some of that. It's not that the justices sit down
and say, OK, we're men. How can we develop law for
men? It's the neutral concepts they have
developed serve the status quo, whether it's
male, whether it's white, whether it's upper
class or bourgeois, whatever it is. And that
constitutional language just does not work very
well to satisfy women's aims this is going to be
probably part of a book that i'm doing on what is
called feminist jurisprudence and that's really
a growing field in the discipline looking at law
from the point of view not of men
but correct me if i'm wrong there's been probably
three doctrines used in in this uh constitutional
doctrines used for sexuality cases. What do you
mean? Up to 71, a certain doctrine was used.
Through the 70s, we had a doctrine, then it
changed. Oh, well, sort of. Okay, you're talking
about sex discrimination. Up to 71... It was
basically a blank check. Sex discrimination was
okay if the states wanted to do it. After 1971, they
kind of, between 71 and 76, they kind of toyed with
it. Well, for a while, you had four justices who
thought you should treat sex as a suspect by the way
you treat race discrimination. That never got a
majority of the court. And then in 76, they came out
with the Intermediate Standard in favor of
scoring. that sex discrimination had to bear a
substantial relationship to an important
governmental objective. And that's essentially
where we are now. So it wasn't really three
doctrines. It was two and a half, because they
never actually decided to make sex a subject
classification. So you said that men are
benefiting right now from the constitutional
doctrine. How about there are benefits from
cultural reasons like, I mean, the economics,
etc.? Well, sure. One of the things that I thought
about was, hey, maybe men benefit because men just
consume more often, go to court more often than
women. Well, there are a few studies of
litigation. Nobody asked that question. So I
devised a very clumsy and very crude measure. My
graduate assistant and I just went through the
court cases and the applications for cert and
counted names. And we left out the criminal cases
because those are going to be all male. We left out
the corporations because we knew the CEOs would be
nearly all male. And we just looked at cases where
we could identify a plaintiff and we found they
were all male. The lowest ratio we got was 2 to 1. The
highest was infinity because there was one set in
which none of the plaintiffs were women. And I
said, you know, I'm still waiting to see what's
said about this now that I've sent it out for
review, because this is crude, and I know it's
crude. But it really does look at, okay, when the
Supreme Court is meeting to decide what it's going
to grant concern on, that most of the cases there
are bought by males anyway. So, yes, I think there
is an economic reason. A lot of studies have said
litigation benefits the haves, not the
have-nots. It takes money, it takes time, it takes
resources to bring a case. You've got to get a
lawyer. Well, most obviously, that means you've
got to pay a lawyer. Even if through some miracle
you get a lawyer who will take the case on a
contingency fee basis, which means that he or she
expects to win, if you bring any kind of suit, I
assure you, you will do a lot of the work yourself.
It takes money and time. In the 50s, the NAACP
helped out the black movement by organizing and
getting money together and having lawyers to do
that. What is NOW doing? Now does have a legal
defense in education fund. And they do help out
some people. Now does not have an awful lot of
money, at least for those purposes. But also
another, you know, when I talk, when I said that
about claims generally, I was not talking about,
you know, when I say women bring suits to women, I
was not saying they bring them more often in sex
discrimination. I was saying they bring them,
period. Right. So only a very small fraction of the
cases brought before the court have to do with sex
discrimination. And there's a lot of
disagreement among feminists about, hey, are the
courts the best place to look? Not right now
they're not. I mean, when somebody has a claim, the
best thing to do is to resolve it. between the two
parties. The easiest and the cheapest thing is a
conference between two lawyers. But of course
now, the corporation that's being sued or the
employer, it basically may say to the woman and her
lawyer, screw you. I'm going to court. I may win.
That's the difficulty. You had an interesting
sentence in the paper about psychological
reasons that men litigate more. Oh, yeah. Are they
more... Okay, that's an old joke about...
Bertrand Russell, the philosopher, wrote a
little thing about how you conjugate irregular
verbs. First person, I am firm. Second person, you
are obstinate. Third person, He's pig-headed.
Well, you know, maybe men are more assertive than
women. Who knows? Does that mean they're more
firm, more obstinate, or more pig-headed? Well, I
leave that to the reader. But, of course, it's also
maybe men are just kicked around more than women.
But whichever of these are true, we really don't
need to resolve it. Well, let's talk about what
movement may go. Where does it want to go? What does
it want to do now? Oh, boy. The movement... is not
monolithic. There is this division basically
between people like Schwartz and Hewlett, the
ones who want to emphasize accommodating women's
role in the family and those who want to question
the role in the family. But I think, however, even
guaranteeing that, there are some things that
everybody's agreed on. I think all feminists,
recognize the need for child care. Whether you're
a mommy tracker or not, whether you believe that
women have to choose one or the other, you are
likely to believe that there need to be better
maternity leaves. I mean, the average woman would
look at six weeks You don't recover physically,
the baby isn't sleeping through the night, you
haven't established a feeding schedule, you go
back to work and you're exhausted. And you need
also parenting leaves for both
men and women. Women, whether they're mothers or
not, whether their family is more important to
them than their job or not, women need an end to
sexual harassment. They need equal opportunity.
They don't really clearly have it, although we're
getting toward that. Most feminists are agreed
that the right to choose to continue or terminate
pregnancy is a necessity. Now, there's a group
that calls itself Feminists for Life, and there
was an article about them being equal today. I
basically think, I don't think that if you take
that viewpoint, you can be a feminist, because
those women always end up arguing, well, women
have a special responsibility towards children.
And I don't think that if you believe that women and
men are equal, you can believe that women come with
an extra load of responsibilities that men have. I
don't think that's equality.
Most feminists are united on that issue that
reproductive choice is a necessity. But that, of
course, is two-sided in European countries.
mother who has custody of a child gets a subsidy
from the state. We're a long way from having that,
and I wouldn't say that the movement saw it as a
goal, but it is one way that responsibilities
toward children could be made easier. There are
lots of ways that we need to aid and help women with
children. Well, we've kind of established that
the courts aren't going to be one of the methods
used by the movement so legislatively. Well,
they're not going to be used as much. State courts
will be.
Who's going to be doing this? Who's going to lead
this movement? Who's going to be its core? Some
people? New people? I think that you'll begin
attracting new people. A lot of the people,
certainly one of the leading feminists, Faye
Waddleton of Planned Parenthood, who was
speaking in Austin the other day, the women
political officials that are elected are going to
be very important. We have, I think, 27 to 28
members of Congress. We have three women
governors. Some of us are hoping there'll be four
pretty soon. There are women judges, especially
in the state courts. it's very hard to know who the
leaders of the movement are going to be in 20 years
or in 10 years. But there will be people. In fact,
maybe some feminists would tell you, hey, this
concentration on leaders is a bad thing. Because
that's really hierarchical. You know, it was
funny. Last night I went to a NOW meeting, and I was a
little late. And when I walked in, everybody said,
Judy, you've got to write a letter to the Eagle
about that story about the Ann Richards thing. And
I said, hey, wait a minute. I wrote the last letter.
but you're so good at it. Hey, come on. You can't
have one or two people grabbing all the publicity.
Somebody else is going to write the letter. And I
think that basically that's a better style of
activity than the leadership. I hope that the
women's movement will never have the equivalent
of a Martin Luther King or a Mark Malcolm X. I mean,
the black movement needed both of those people. Or
a Jesse Jackson. Well, I don't know. We're
obviously going to have the first woman candidate
for president. Maybe it'll be Pat Schroeder, who
wrote about it last time. And she's probably going
to lose, the same way Jackson has. I think that King
and Malcolm were essential to the black movement,
don't get me wrong, but I am not sure the feminist
movement has the same kind of keys. What are you
going to do? I'm going to keep on being scholar
first and activist second. I've got plans for this
world to book on. Women in the Law, which is going to
be an undergraduate text, should be out in the fall
of 1990. And I'm going to write this feminist shirt
for this thing. And I probably will continue to be
active in feminist things in Brazos Valley. I
mean, this is the smallest community I've ever
lived in. And essentially, you know, I'm used to if
you're in Chicago or Los Angeles or Albany, you
know, there's going to be a demonstration.
There's usually a sign that says, bus will be
leaving such and such a place at such and such a
time. Call this number to make a reservation. The
cost is $10. What I have learned is that in Brazos
County, if I don't do it, it doesn't get done. There
are a few of us, and you know, we had to rent a van and
all this stuff. And basically the nitty-gritty
stuff has to be done by a few individuals. So
probably I'll continue to be more prominent than I
was ever before, simply because there are fewer of
us here. Well, what about your textbook? Okay,
that may be using that, most of it, because there's
only one chapter that needs to be written. As a, you
know, I'm going to send it to Kinko's and use it for
my Women in the Law course this coming spring. I
used part of it last time. It's not designed as a
casebook. I have a casebook there. It's really
designed as a general treatment of the subject of
women in the law, both for students and for a
general audience. is not original research. It's
the only textbook of its kind so far, and the
publisher assures me that they already have
advance orders for it. So, of course, I'll
probably end up revising it every year, but
anyway, that's what happens when you write a text.
When I was approached with that, I was at Cal Poly,
California State Polytechnic University,
Pomona, which has a horrendous teaching load, and
I didn't think I would ever get any real research
done. And I thought, why don't you just do this?
It's the kind of thing you can do. without having to
devote some really heavy thinking to it, and you
might even get it done. So go ahead, and I did, and
then I moved here, and I've got a lot more time to do
research. Well, let's talk about A&M a little bit
then. Okay, this is my second year here. This is a
wonderful department to be in. very diverse, very
bright, very hardworking, active, productive
people.
One of the things I could improve about the
university was the law collection of the library,
but it is a good place to work.
The community is a small town, southern
community, and that's very hard for a New
Englander to live in. It's a long way from
Cambridge. It's an interesting kind of
adjustment. Does it seem like it's behind the
times a little bit? Yes.
I'll give an example. I'm on the Women's Studies
Program Review Committee, and we had a retreat
last spring, and we were talking about the same
issue, basically, the relational feminism,
mommy track, family issue. And somebody said, one
of the women faculty in the College of Liberal Arts
said, well, the movement can even include
lesbians. And I had to bite my tongue. I just wanted
to hear it, and say, the lesbians in Berkeley,
Cambridge, Madison and Iowa City will really be
very glad. It is just so totally beyond the time.
That is not an issue.
There's a lag time for things, like the black
movement. They got legal rights. The movement was
able to get legal rights through the courts,
through legislation. And then, socially, it
hasn't turned. What about this woman's view?
There is an extent to which I am a Marxist. I accept
the idea that there are economic classes in
society, one of which exploits the other. Blacks,
when there are workers, that's when they're
lucky. Women are workers and wives. are owners,
and I mean owners of means of production, they're
not any longer owners of good means. Of course
there's going to be a lag between the achievement
of equal rights and full economic equality. The
reason that most groups need equal rights is that
they're economically unequal, and the reason
that most groups are economically unequal is
because they are exploited. The labor of blacks as
slaves, as sharecroppers, as workers is
exploited. The labor of women as unpaid house
workers, as maids, as secretaries, as nurses, as
school teachers has been exploited. Now, that's
not true of all disadvantaged groups. The
disabled are not exploited systematically,
although certainly many of them, you know, You can
work for Goodwill Industries if you're blind
making light bulbs for 60 cents an hour. I mean,
come on. But it's not a systematic economic
exploitation. To some extent, the disabled are
cut out of the exploitation situation at all. So
are Native Americans. I mean, they've been
encouraged. The tape player messed up. I came back
the next day and continued the interview. We're on
the same question. I'll let her close up. She's
saying that this is true of the oppressed groups,
of all oppressed groups. There'll still be a
little bit of a break, but there's about 15 more
minutes of interview. Many oppressed groups,
that this oppression is economically feasible,
and that is one reason that it continues. Another
reason is that even when laws change, people do not
necessarily think of doing anything different
than what they have been doing. Most of the women my
age, in the 40s and even in the 30s, really believe,
that's age, not decade, of the century, really
were encouraged to think in terms of such female
occupations as being teachers, social workers,
librarians. If you were working class, you were
often encouraged to think of yourself as a nurse or
a secretary. These are all clerical workers.
These are all poorly paid, poorly rewarded,
traditionally female professions. And to the
extent that women go into those, whether they go
into them voluntarily or not, they are really
going into exploited jobs and things are not going
to change very much. This is not only because they
choose them, this is because they never really
have the opportunity to choose anything else.
Certainly, law cannot immediately change
the behavior either of people who have been
exploited or the behavior of people who have been
doing the exploiting. Men are going to continue to
treat women in certain ways, whites to treat
blacks in certain ways, and so on. So it is very hard
to affect permanent social change, and it's a
long, long struggle to do that. One interesting
thing, you know, there's a great, great deal of
debate within social science professions as to
whether blacks are oppressed by racism or that
they are oppressed by factors within their own
behavior. And the example always given is the
family structure. You know that there are a lot of
more black women than white women have jobs.
children beginning at age 15 and don't get married
and so on. It's suggested that the real problem is
not racism, it's that so many people live in this
way which virtually cuts them out of any kind of
economic advancement. But of course the question
has to be asked why anyone should be expected to
conform their family structure to the white
middle class norm. You know, essentially people
may not be so much disadvantaged for being black as
disadvantaged for a different kind of family
structure, a different kind of choices which seem
quite natural. And yes, it would be much better if
black teenagers didn't have babies, but on the
other hand, poverty is not a natural consequence
of having a family which is headed by a young female
single parent. It is a socially imposed
consequence. I'm going to let you wrap this
interview up on any point you'd like to make and
just add anything you feel like you'd like to add.
Actually, I think really this is about it. I got a
lot said that day. I thought that that thing had
really gone on the blink a lot earlier than it had.
No, you got most of it. I really think there was only
a minute or two that we didn't get. That's right. So
I think really that's about it. We can wind that up.
Thank you. Okay, now they're working.
Come on, record something. Let me hear what you got
to say.